7. Which of the following gave the idea of Constituent Assembly for
India?
(a) Simon Commission
(b) Rajaji Formula
(c) Cabinet Mission Plan
(d) Wavell Plan
7. (c) Cabinet Mission Plan gave the idea of Constituent
Assembly for India. In 1946, British Prime Minister Clement
Attlee formulated a Cabinet Mission to India.
‘Rajaji’ formula was formulated by C. Rajagopalchari to solve the
political dead-lock between All India Muslim League and
Indian-National Congress. Wavell plan (1945) was talks
between these two political parties.
24.
‘The Draft Constitution as framed only provides a machinery for
the government of the country. It is not a contrivance to install
any particular party in power as has been done in some
countries. Who should be in power is left to be determined by
the people, as it must be, if the system is to satisfy the test of
democracy’
. [2014-I]
The above passage from Constituent Assembly debates is attributed
to
(a) Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru
(b) Dr B R Ambedkar
(c) Maulana Abdul Kalam Azad
(d) Acharya J B Kriplani
24. (b) On 29 August 1947, the Drafting Committee was appointed
with Dr B. R. Ambedkar as the Chairman along with six
other members assisted by a constitutional advisor. These
members were Pandit Govind Ballabh Pant, K M Munshi,
Alladi Krishnaswamy Iyer, N Gopala swami Ayengar, B L
Mitter and Md. Saadullah. A Draft Constitution was
prepared by the committee and submitted to the Assembly
on 4 November 1947.This is Ambedkar’s second argument
rested on the legitimacy of the democratic system.
68. In which schedule of the Indian Constitution powers of
panchayats are stated?
(a) 8th schedule
(b) 9th schedule
(c) 10th schedule
(d) 11th schedule
68. (d) The powers of panchayats are stated in the 11th schedule of the Indian Constitution.
The 8th schedule of the constitution enlists 22 Indian recognized languages. The 9th
schedule was added by 1st amendment in 1957. It contains acts, orders
related to land tenure, land tax, railways industry. 10th
schedule was added by 52nd amendment in 1985, contains
provisions of disqualification of grounds of defection.
70. Under which article the parliament provides financial assistance
to states?
(a) Article 273
(b) Article 274
(c) Article 275
(d) Article 276
70. (c) Under the Article 275 the Parliament provides financial
assistance to states. This is a central sector scheme and
grants are provided to the states on the basis of ST
population percentage in the state to the total tribal
population of the country. Article 273 deals with grants in
lieu of export duty on jute and jute products. Article 274
mentions prior recommendation of President required to Bills
affecting taxation in which states are interested. Article 276
is about taxes on professions, trades, callings and
employment.
8. Delimitation of constituencies and determination of
constituencies reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes are done by [NDA 2012-II]
(a) Election Commission
(b) Delimitation Commission
(c) Planning Commission
(d) Election Commission with the assistance of Delimitation
Commission
8. (b) Delimitation commission of India is a Commission
established by Government of India under the provisions of
the Delimitation Commission Act. In India, such Delimitation
Commissions have been constituted 4 times - in 1952 under
the Delimitation Commission Act, 1952, in 1963 under
Delimitation Commission Act, 1962, in 1973 under
Delimitation Act, 1972 and in 2002 under Delimitation Act,
2002. The main task of the commission is to redraw the
boundaries of the various assembly and Lok Sabha
constituencies based on a recent census. The
representation from each state is not changed during this
exercise. However, the number of SC and ST seats in a
state is changed in accordance with the census.
9. Consider the following statements about State Election
Commission ? [NDA 2014-II]
1. The State Election Commissioner shall be appointed by the
Governor of the State.
2. The State Election Commission shall have the power of even
preparing the electoral rolls besides the power of
superintendence, direction and control of election to the
panchayats.
3. The State Election Commissioner cannot be removed in any
manner from his office until he demits himself or completes
his tenure.
Which of the above statements is/are correct?
(a) 1, 2 and 3
(b) 1 and 2 only
(c) 2 and 3 only
(d) 1 only
9. (b) Three Election Commissioners in the each State shall be
appointed by the Governor of the respective State from a
penal of five names for each office forwarded by the
Election Commission of India to the provision of the
Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992 and the
Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992,
whereunder the constitution of State Election Commissions
and appointment of State Election Commissioners are
contemplated to superintend, direct and control the
preparation of the electoral rolls for, and the conduct of
elections to Panchayats and Municipalities. Election
Commissioner of a State can be removed by the Full Bench
of State Judicial Commission on the basis of enquiry and
investigation made by a judicial committee constituted for
the purpose, consisting of two Chief Justices and one Judge
from different High Courts.
42. Which of the following is not a Constitutional body?
[UP-PCS 2013]
(a) Union Public Service Commission
(b) State Public Service Commission
(c) Finance Commission
(d) Planning Commission
42. (d) Planning Commission was an Executive body (created by
an Executive order and the rest are constitutional bodies
created by the provisions of the Constitution).
57. Financial distribution between the Union and the State takes
place on the basis of the recommendations of which one of the
following? [NDA 2008-I]
(a) The National Development Council
(b) The Inter-State Council
(c) The Planning Commission
(d) The Finance Commission
57. (d) The Finance Commission is constituted by the President
under article 280 of the Constitution, mainly to give its
recommendations on distribution of tax revenues between
the Union and the States and amongst the States
Themselves.
1. Any amendment in the Constitution of India, in regard to which of
the following subjects, needs only simple majority of the
parliament? [CDS-2017]
1. Directive principles of state policy.
2. Election of the President and its manner
3. Quorum in the Parliament
4. Creation of the Legislative Council in a State
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 1 and 2 only
(b) 2 and 3 only
(c) 3 and 4 only
(d) 1 and 4 only
1. (c) The amendment in the Directive Principle of state policy
needs for a special majority of the Parliament where the
amendment in the election of the President and its manner
needs for a special majority of the parliament.
9. Consider the following statements : [NDA-2017]
1. An amendment of the Constitution of India can be initiated by the introduction of a Bill only
in the Lok Sabha.
2. The Bill for amendment of the Constitution of India has to be
passed in each House by a majority of the total membership
of that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of
the members of that House Present and voting.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct?
(a) Only 1
(b) Only 2
(c) Both 1 and 2
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
9. (b) An amendment of the constitution can be initiated only by
the introduction of a bill for the purpose in either House of
Parliament and not in the state legislatures.
43.
‘Zero Hour’ in political jargon refers to [CDS-2017]
(a) Suspended motion
(b) Question hour
(c) Adjourned time
(d) Question-answer session
43. (d) ‘Zero Hour’ in Political jargon refers to question answer
session. Zero Hour in Parliament starts at 12 noon during
which members raise matters of importance, especially
those that cannot be delayed.
51. The first reading of the Bill in a House of Parliament refers to
: [CDS-2017]
(a) The motion for leave to introduce a Bill in the House
(b) The general discussion on the Bill as whole where only the
principle underlying the Bill is discussed and not the details
of the bill.
(c) The general discussion on the Bill where the bill is discussed in
details.
(d) The state when the Bill is referred either to select committee of
the House or to the joint committee of the two houses.
51. (a) The first reading of the bill in a house of parliament refers
to motion for leave to introduce the bill in the House.If a
motion for leave to introduce a Bill is opposed, the Speaker,
after permitting, if he thinks fit, brief statements from the
member who opposes the motion and the member who
moved the motion, may, without further debate, put the
question: provided that where a motion is opposed on the
ground that the Bill initiates legislation outside the legislative
competence of the House, the Speaker may permit a full
discussion thereon. Provided further that the Speaker shall
forthwith put to vote the motion for leave to introduce a
Finance Bill or an Appropriation Bill.
17. Consider the following statements and select the correct answer
from the codes given below :
Assertion (a) : According to the Constitution of India, the same
person cannot function as the Governor of two or
more States at the same time.
Reason (R) : Article 153 of the Constitution states that there
shall be a Governor for each State.
Codes :
(a) Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct
explanation of A
(b) Both A and R are individually true but R is not the correct
explanation of A
(c) A is true but R is false
(d) A is false but R is true
17. (d) In article 158 of the Constitution, after clause (3), the
following clause shall be inserted, namely:
“(3A) Where the same person is appointed as Governor of two or
more States, the emoluments and allowances payable to
the Governor shall be allocated among the States in such
proportion as the President may by order determine.
”
Clause 6 -Article 153 provides that there shall be a
Governor for each State. Since it may be desirable in
certain circumstances to appoint a Governor for two or more
States, it is proposed to add a proviso to this article to
remove any possible technical bar to such an appointment.
20. A governor can make recommendation to the president on
which of the following issues?
1. Removal of the members of the state PSC
2. Removal of the judges of the High Court
3. Dissolution of the State Legislative Assembly
4. Declaration of the breakdown of the constitutional machinery in
the state.
20. (c) A Governor can make recommendation, to the president on
dissolution of the state legislative assembly and the
declaration of the breakdown of the constitution machinery
in the state. Under article 356 State emergency is declared
on failure of constitutional machinery in a state. Nearly
every state in India has been under a state of emergency at
some point of time or the other. The state of emergency is
commonly known as ‘President’s Rule’
.
35. The Governor may recommend the imposition of the President’s
rule in the state [NDA 2013-II]
35. (d) President’s rule refers to Article 356 of the Constitution of
India deals with the failure of the constitutional machinery of
an Indian state. In the event that government in a state is
not able to function as per the Constitution, the state comes
under the direct control of the central government, with
executive authority exercised through the Governor instead
of a Council of Ministers headed by an elected Chief
Minister accountable to the state legislature. Article 356 is
invoked if there has been failure of the constitutional
machinery in any states of India.
37. Which among the following States did record the formation of
maximum Coalition Governments in between 1967 to
1971? [UP-PCS 2013]
(a) Uttar Pradesh
(b) Haryana
(c) Bihar
(d) Punjab
37. (c) The maximum number of coalition government between
1967 to 1971-72 was formed in Bihar. During this period 9
governments were formed in the state.
13. Who was the president of the committee on whose
recommendation was the Panchayati Raj established in India?
(a) Balwant Rai Mehta
(b) Ashok Mehta
(c) Dr. Iqbal Narayan
(d) Jeevraj Mehta
13. (a) The Balwant Rai Mehta Committee, headed by MP
Balwantrai Mehta, was a committee appointed by the
Government of India in January 1957 to examine the
working of the Community Development Programme (1952)
and the National Extension Service (1953) and to suggest
measures for their better working.
15. The decision to conduct Panchayat Elections is taken by which
of the following? [CDS-2017]
(a) The Central Government
(b) The State Government
(c) The District Judge
(d) The Election Commission
15. (b) The State Election Commissions constituted under the
Constitution (Seventy-third and Seventy-fourth)
Amendments Act, 1992 for each State / Union Territory are
vested with the powers of conduct of elections to the
Corporations, Municipalities, Zilla Parishads, District
Panchayats, Panchayat Samitis, Gram Panchayats and
other local bodies. They are independent of the Election
Commission of India.
47. Which is the first state in South India to introduce Panchayati
Raj? [CDS-2017]
(a) Andhra Pradesh
(b) Kerala
(c) Tamil Nadu
(d) Karnataka
47. (a) Andhra Pradesh is the first state in South India to introduce
Panchayati Raj. Overall second state in India after
Rajasthan.
54. Consider the following statements: [NDA-2017]
1. The goal of empowering Gram Sabha as the voice of
Panchayats through Article 243A of the constitution was to
provide a democratic basis to decentralized decision
making.
2. The Ministry of Environment and Forests, has recently modified
a circular it issued in 2009 and allowed building activities in
forests areas without the need for Gram Sabha consent.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only
(b) 2 only
(c) Both 1 and 2
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
54. (c) Article 243 A of the constitution is to provide a democratic
basis to decentralized decision-making. A Gram Sabha may
exercise such powers and perform such functions at the
village level as the legislature of a state may by law, provide
6. Consider the following statements:
1. The first National Commission for Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes was constituted in the year 1992.
2. The first National Commission for Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes was constituted under the Constitution
(Sixty-fifth Amendment) Act.
3. The 87th Amendment bifurcated the combined National
Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
into two separate bodies.
Which of the statements given above are correct ?
(a) 1 and 2
(b) 2 and 3
(c) 1 and 3
(d) 1, 2 and 3
6. (a) The first Commission was constituted in 1992 with
Shri S.H. Ramdhan as chairman. The second
Commission was constituted in October 1995 with
Shri H. Hanumanthappa as chairman.
The 65th Constitutional Amendment Act of 1990 provided for the
establishment of a high level National Commission for SCs
and STs.
The 89th constitution Amendment Act of 2003 bifurcated the
Combined National Commission for SCs and STs into two
separate bodies.
13. Assertion (a) : An award made by a Lok Adalat is deemed be a
decree of a Civil Court.
Reason (R) : Award of Lok Adalat is final and binding on all
parties, and no appeal lies against thereto before
any court
[NDA 2008-II]
Codes:
(a) Bath A and R are true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) Both A and R are true, but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) A is true, but R is false
(d) A is false, but R is true
13. (b) The award of the Lok Adalat is fictionally deemed to be
decrees of Court and therefore the court has all the powers
in relation thereto as it has in relation to a decree passed by
itself. This includes the powers to extend time in appropriate
cases. The award passed by the Lok Adalat is the decision
of the court itself, though, arrived at by the simpler method
of conciliation instead of the process of arguments in court.


Indian Polity MCQ Set (UPSC Standard)
Constitutional Framework and Historical Background
Q1. Which of the following Articles of the Indian Constitution deals with the Proportional
representation by means of a single transferable vote?
(a) Article 80
(b) Article 81
(c) Article 55
(d) Article 82
Answer: (c)
Explanation: Article 55 provides that the election of the President shall be held in accordance with the system
of proportional representation by means of a single transferable vote and secret ballot.
Q2. Which of the following committees recommended the reorganization of States on linguistic
basis?
(a) Dhar Commission
(b) Fazl Ali Commission
(c) JVP Committee
(d) Balwant Rai Mehta Committee
Answer: (b)
Explanation: The States Reorganisation Commission (1953) headed by Fazl Ali recommended the
reorganization of states on linguistic basis.
Parliament and Parliamentary Procedures
Q3. Who among the following can recommend the dissolution of the Lok Sabha?
(a) President of India
(b) Speaker of Lok Sabha
(c) Prime Minister
(d) Council of Ministers
Answer: (c)
Explanation: The Prime Minister advises the President to dissolve the Lok Sabha under Article 85(2)(b).
Q4. The Money Bill can be introduced in the Parliament only with the prior recommendation of
(a) Prime Minister

Indian Polity MCQ Set (UPSC Standard)
(b) President of India
(c) Speaker of Lok Sabha
(d) Finance Minister
Answer: (b)
Explanation: Under Article 110, a Money Bill can be introduced only in Lok Sabha with the prior
recommendation of the President.
Q5. Zero Hour in political jargon refers to
(a) Suspended motion
(b) Question hour
(c) Adjourned time
(d) Question-answer session
Answer: (d)
Explanation: Zero Hour in Parliament starts at 12 noon during which members raise matters of urgent public
importance.
Central Executive
Q6. Which of the following Articles provides for the impeachment of the President?
(a) Article 60
(b) Article 61
(c) Article 62
(d) Article 63
Answer: (b)
Explanation: Article 61 lays down the procedure for impeachment of the President for violation of the
Constitution.
Q7. Which of the following statements about the Vice-President of India is correct?
(a) He is a member of the Rajya Sabha
(b) He acts as the ex-officio Chairman of the Rajya Sabha
(c) He is elected by members of the Rajya Sabha only
(d) He holds office for six years
Answer: (b)

Indian Polity MCQ Set (UPSC Standard)
Explanation: The Vice-President functions as the ex-officio Chairman of Rajya Sabha under Article 64.
Judiciary
Q8. The concept of Judicial Review in the Indian Constitution has been borrowed from which
country?
(a) United States of America
(b) United Kingdom
(c) Canada
(d) Ireland
Answer: (a)
Explanation: The concept of judicial review was borrowed from the U.S. Constitution; the Supreme Court
exercises it under Articles 13, 32, and 226.
Q9. Which Constitutional Amendment is related to the establishment of the National Judicial
Appointments Commission (NJAC)?
(a) 99th Amendment Act, 2014
(b) 97th Amendment Act, 2011
(c) 100th Amendment Act, 2015
(d) 101st Amendment Act, 2016
Answer: (a)
Explanation: The 99th Constitutional Amendment Act, 2014 established the NJAC, later struck down as
unconstitutional by the Supreme Court in 2015.
Fundamental Rights and DPSPs
Q10. Which of the following rights is available to both citizens and non-citizens of India?
(a) Freedom of speech and expression
(b) Right to life and personal liberty
(c) Right to form associations
(d) Right to reside anywhere in India
Answer: (b)
Explanation: Article 21 guarantees right to life and personal liberty to all persons, not just citizens.

Indian Polity MCQ Set (UPSC Standard)
Q11. Which of the following provisions deals with the protection of interests of minorities?
(a) Article 14
(b) Article 25
(c) Article 29
(d) Article 32
Answer: (c)
Explanation: Article 29 protects cultural and educational rights of minorities to conserve their language, script,
and culture.
Q12. Which among the following statements about the Directive Principles of State Policy (DPSPs) is
NOT correct?
(a) They are fundamental in governance
(b) They are enforceable in a court of law
(c) They aim at establishing a welfare state
(d) They guide the state in policy-making
Answer: (b)
Explanation: DPSPs are non-justiciable but fundamental in the governance of the country under Part IV of the
Constitution.
Federalism and Local Governance
Q13. Which schedule of the Indian Constitution mentions powers of Panchayats?
(a) 8th Schedule
(b) 9th Schedule
(c) 10th Schedule
(d) 11th Schedule
Answer: (d)
Explanation: The 11th Schedule (added by the 73rd Amendment) lists powers and responsibilities of
Panchayats.
Q14. The decision to conduct Panchayat Elections is taken by which of the following?
(a) Central Government
(b) State Government

Indian Polity MCQ Set (UPSC Standard)
(c) District Judge
(d) Election Commission
Answer: (b)
Explanation: State Election Commissions, constituted under the 73rd and 74th Amendments, conduct
Panchayat elections.
Emergency Provisions
Q15. Which one of the following statements regarding the Emergency provisions is correct?
(a) Fundamental Rights are automatically suspended
(b) Parliament cannot legislate on State subjects
(c) The term of Lok Sabha may be extended
(d) State Assemblies stand dissolved automatically
Answer: (c)
Explanation: Under Article 83(2), the Lok Sabhas term may be extended by Parliament for one year at a time
during a National Emergency.
